Add Motoko v0.11.0 migration guide (#2605)
dfinity/portal: docs/developer-docs/backend/motoko/0.11.0-migration-guide.mdx

---
keywords: [motoko, 0.11.0, migration guide, safety feature, breaking change]
---

import { MarkdownChipRow } from "/src/components/Chip/MarkdownChipRow";

# Motoko v0.11.0: Safety feature migration guide

<MarkdownChipRow labels={["Motoko", "Migration guide"]} />

## Overview

> Motoko v0.11.0 and newer introduces a new safety feature that could cause breaking changes to existing workflows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Motoko v0.11.0 and newer introduces a new safety feature that could cause breaking changes to existing code.
```

> In previous Motoko versions, third-party library functions could make calls to sensitive functions such as `ExperimentalCycles.add(...)` and `Timer.setTimer(...)` without providing indication that to the caller that sensitive system functionality was being used.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In previous Motoko versions, third-party library functions could make calls to sensitive functions such as `ExperimentalCycles.add(...)` and `Timer.setTimer(...)` without providing any indication to the caller that sensitive system functionality was being used.
```

In Motoko 0.11.0 and newer, the type system is used to detect and prevent this scenario while still allowing developers to grant access to sensitive functions.

## Motoko v0.11.0 changes

Motoko uses a simple capability-based type system which selectively enables language constructs depending on their context. One example is only `async` expressions can contain `await` expressions, or only some asynchronous contexts can call shared functions.

> In Motoko v0.11.0 and newer, this capability system is expanded to restrict calls to functions including `Timer.setTimer` and `ExperimentalCycles.add`. To accomplish this, Motoko introduces and uses the pseudo-type parameter `system` and corresponding pseudo-type argument (also system) for both functions and classes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Motoko v0.11.0 and newer, this capability system is expanded to restrict calls to functions including `Timer.setTimer` and `ExperimentalCycles.add`. To accomplish this, Motoko introduces and uses the pseudo-type parameter `system` and corresponding pseudo-type argument (also `system`) for both functions and classes.
```

> Another change in v0.11.0 and newer is a revision of `ExperimentalCycles.add`, which has been changed from `Nat -> ()` to `<system>Nat -> ()`. This change supports the system capability requirement of the special type parameter `<system>`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Another change in v0.11.0 and newer is a revision of `ExperimentalCycles.add`, whose type has been changed from `Nat -> ()` to `<system>Nat -> ()`. This change reflects the additional  `system` capability requirement using the type parameter `<system>`.
```

:::info
The `system` type parameter must be the first parameter of any function, class constructor or function type, e.g. `<system, T, U>` is valid but `<T, system, U>` is not.
:::

## Migrations for existing workflows

> User-defined functions must now declare an explicit system pseudo-type parameter if they require system capabilities. If a caller wants to grant system capabilities to a callee, the callee must have system capabilities either through the program's context or the call must reside within a function or class that requires a system pseudo parameter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
User-defined functions must now declare an explicit system pseudo-type parameter if they require system capabilities. If a caller wants to grant system capabilities to a callee, the caller must already have system capabilities either (implicitly) by virtue of the callsite's progam context or (explicitly) because the callsite resides within a function or class that itself declares the new `system`  type parameter.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
User-defined functions must now declare an explicit system pseudo-type parameter if they require system capabilities. If a caller wants to grant system capabilities to a callee, the caller must have system capabilities either through the program's context or the call must reside within a function or class that requires a system pseudo parameter.
```
If that's too radical, do still change callee to caller as indicated.

  };
```

This code will include a warning to reflect that `ExperimentalCycles.add` is implicitly using system capability:

```
this function call implicitly requires `system` capability and may perform undesired actions (please review the call and provide a type instantiation `<system>` to suppress this warning)(M0195)
```

This warning can be silenced by adding the pseudo-type argument `system` at the call-site:

```motoko
  func splitCycles<system>() {
    let amount = ExperimentalCycles.balance() / 2;
    ExperimentalCycles.add<system>(amount); // no warning or error
  }
```

Developers whose code has proper capability related errors that prevent compilation will need to refactor their code to explicitly pass down the system capabilities using additional type parameters and arguments.

## System capability syntax limitations

System capability is available within the following contexts:

- Within the body of an actor expression or actor class.
- Within the body of a (non- query) shared function, asynchronous function, async expression or async* expression.
- Within the body of a local (i.e. not shared) function or class that is declared with `system` pseudo-type parameter.

> - Within the system functions `preupgrade` and `postupgrade`.

Reviewer: (unless you deliberatel remove the code quotes (though it might be accidental)
